To the ancient Romans, the planet Mars
was symbolic of blood
and war.
But to many people today,
the red planet may hold the key
for a bright new future for humanity.
The story of Mars began about 4.5
billion years ago when gas and dust
swirled together to form the fourth planet
from the Sun.
Mars is the second smallest planet in
the solar system with a diameter just
shy of the width of Africa.
In fact, its entire surface area is
similar to that of all of Earth's
continents combined.
Much like its terrestrial cousin, Mars is
dense and has a rocky composition.
At the center of the planet is a core
made of iron, nickel, and sulfur, which may
have created a protective magnetic field
during Mars' earlier years.
Enveloping the core is a rocky mantle
made of silicate minerals
and a crust rich in iron.
These iron minerals react with the trace
amounts of oxygen in Mars's atmosphere
and rust,
giving the planet its signature reddish
hue.
While its bloodlike appearance inspired
the ancient Romans to name Mars after
their god of war,
the planet's rusty color could be
considered symbolic of the planet's
prime days long past.
Today, Mars is dry, desolate, and cold, with
temperatures dropping as low as negative
225 degrees Fahrenheit.
But billions of years ago, the planet was
much warmer, more geologically active, and
had a watery surface.
Lake beds and river valleys snake along
the face of Mars, indicating that liquid
water was for a time present.
Volcanoes, such as Olympus Mons, the
largest volcano in the solar system at
three times the height of Mount Everest,
once erupted lava.
But by about 50 million years ago, soon
after Earth's dinosaurs died out, Mars'
volcanoes also went extinct.
Water on the Red Planet still exists
today, but mostly in the form of polar
ice caps.
Because of factors such as the presence
of water and Mars' similarity to Earth,
scientists have long speculated that
there might be life on Mars.
However, we have yet to find clear evidence
of past or present extraterrestrial life.
Regardless, Mars may play a big role in
the future of human life.
In the ongoing search for habitable
worlds, Mars is a prime target.
Not only could it potentially support
human life, but it may also help us
understand more about our own planet's
history and future.
As we venture further into the cosmos,
the red planet will continue to inspire
us, symbolizing not war, but hope.